---
layout: post
title: "Chapter 1: Cognitive Neuroscience: Definitions, Themes, and Approaches"
---

## Cognition

Cognition: the faculty of knowing. The set of processes (cognitive functions) that allow humans and animals to perceive external stimuli, to extract key information and hold it in memory, and ultimately to generate thoughts and actions that help reach desired goals. 

The problem of defining "mind": in common parlance, the mind consists of subjective, conscious experiences. However modern neuroscience rarely only studies conscious experience. 

In this book: mind: subjective sense of self; cognition/cognitive functions: specific sorts of information processing studied by cognitive neuroscientists. 

### Natural philosophy and early psychology

Early models of mental processes built through behavioural observation and experimental manipulation in 19th century. 

### Behaviourism

Behaviourism: highly controlled experiments that matched objective external stimuli to measurable behaviour. Rejected subjective work on mental functions as being outside the domain of proper scientific inquiry. 

Behaviourism advanced the scientific understanding of behaviour in ways including the development of stimulus-response learning paradigms that remain widely used. It also grounded psychology firmly in an objective experimental approach. However by only focusing on learning from rewards, it ignored other cognitive functions and complex mental states. 

### Cognitive science

In the mid-20th century, advanced in computational science revived psychological research on cognitive functions. E.g. George Miller's study on "immediate memory" that humans can only maintain 7 unique items at once. His results were reported using terms such as "information" or "bits". Because perceptual judgments can represent only about 2.5 bits of info, Miller argued that memory must recode more complex stimuli into smaller units of cognitive processing. Memory is thus not a passive representation of sensory stimuli but an active recoding of the information the stimuli carried. (This feels incredibly modern??)

The "mind as computer" metaphor. 

In the 1950s and 1960s, behaviourism began to be rejected. Noam Chomsky argued that behaviourism could never explain the structural and generative properties of mental phenomena such as human language. Psychologists began to involve more human participants in their research, and to investigate high-level, conscious processes. 

The term cognitive science unifies research on mental processes regardless of the specific topic, experimental approach, method, or even discipline. It focuses on information processing associated with cognitive functions, and includes research with human participants, studies in non-human animals, and computational simulation of cognitive functions. 

Cognitive models predict how sensory input leads to some behavioral output. Elements of cognitive models are sometimes called psychological constructs, in recognition that they are created to help explain diverse phenomena without reference to their ultimate causes in the brain. However recent developments in neuroscience held promise for grounding psychological constructs in neurobiological processes. 

## Neuroscience

Nervous systems are found in all but the simplest animals. Neuroscience is concerned with how the nervous systems of humans and other animals are organized and function. Early knowledge about the nervous system came from clinical cases. 

By the early 19th century, physicians became interested in the functional properties of the cerebral cortex. Idea of localisation of function is introduced. Identification of neurons in the late 19th century by Santiago Ramón y Cajal. 

By the earliest 20th century, recording techniques that could track changes in neuron's electrical signals were developed. Neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield created a systematic map of the somatosensory cortex. 

## Cognitive Neuroscience: The Neurobiological Approach to Cognition

Cognitive neuroscience is defined by work at the intersection of cognitive science and neuroscience. 

Misconceptions from interdisciplinarity. E.g., the misconception that cognitive neuroscience simply maps the brain regions that are activated during a psychological process (neural correlates of cognition). 

Much current research combines information about brain structure and function to create neurobiologically grounded models of cognition. E.g. models of perception and of motor control have been transformed by findings from neuroscience, and it's impossible to consider how these functions work without reference to what is now known of their underlying neural substrates. E.g. recording brain activity during attention tasks found that attention filters stimuli both at initial stages and high-level stages. 

Practical applications of cognitive neurosciences. E.g., individual differences. By linking individual differences in cognition to individual differences in brain function, we have begun to understand the neural bases for both typical and atypical cognition at any stage of the human life span. 

## Methods: Convergence and Complementarity

Convergence describes the approach of combining results from multiple experimental paradigms to illuminate a single theoretical concept. When the same results is observed across a range of experimental tasks, then that commonality leads to a stronger inference than could be drawn form any one experiment. Convergence is often facilitated by meta-analysis. 

Complementarity: because brain function is expressed through many diverse physiological changes, different research methods provide insight into different aspects of physiology: fMRI, EEG, PET, TMS, single-neuron recording, etc. None of these techniques provides a complete accounting of brain function. 

> **Convergence through meta-analysis**
>
> Qualitative meta-analysis: a research team first identifies a comprehensive set of studies on the same cognitive function and then looks for similarities among their results. 
>
> Quantitative meta-analysis: e.g. in fMRI, activation likelihood estimation: probabilistic maps of combined activation data. 
>
> Semantic/Ontological meta-analysis: combines studies according to similarity in their underlying concepts. In scientometrics, meta-analytic methods are applied to the text content and citations of research articles. Patterns of co-citations or co-occurrences of terms in articles can be used to identify relationships between concepts, which in turn can be combined into semantic maps of the literature. 

Some techniques provide info on blood oxygenation (fMRI) induced by neural activity. Others indicate how single (single-unit recording) or send info or integrate information from other neurons (local field potentials and EEG). Perturbation techniques (TMS, drug administration, lesion studies) alter brain function and can be used to evaluate how specific brain regions or systems contribute causally to specific cognitive processes. Each technique has strengths and limitations. 