---
layout: post
title: 'Chapter 6: General Discussion and Conclusion'
---

## Summary and Discussion of the Findings

Study 1 investigated how the F0 realization of full tones in Standard Mandarin varies in anticipation of a following tone. 3TS was attested. Three different types of ATC were attested: DR, AR, and AL. 

Study 2 examined whether 3TS and ATC (AR in T4T4) facilitate spoken-word recognition and whether listeners can employ such cues to make tonal predictions of the next words. Evidence for facilitation and prediction based on 3TS, but not ATC. ATC might help predict the tone of the next word, but they were not as reliable as 3TS cues. 

Study 3 re-evaluated whether the phonological form of predictable words can be pre-activated in spoken language processing. 3TS elicited enhanced N400-like early negativity in IST trials than correct trials. 

ERP effect ar target words show that ERP modulation of correct numbers 3TS vs ATC could be that 3TS enhance prediction. Pre-activation level of correct numbers could be falsely elevated by 3TS in the incorrect trials. 

In summary listeners can use different levels of linguistic info to formulate prediction and facilitate comprehension. Furthermore predictable words' pre-activation levels can be enhanced by various cues. 

## Limitation and Furture Directions

- Study 3 used extremely constraining contexts. Findings may not be generalizable. 
- No significant ERP effects were found at critical verbs in Study 3. 
- Compared Exp-3TS with Exp-ATC in Study 2, because visual displays were exactly the same. However pre-target acoustic cues were different between experiments. 

## Concluding Remarks

To conclude, this dissertation contributes to resolving the dispute over phonological form pre-activation in the literature by showing that the lack of pre-nominal ERP effects does not necessarily deny phonological form pre-activation; rather, it could indicate that the cues presented in the pre-target words are not a reliable indicator of the phonological form of the target words.

This dissertation also has methodological implications for studies on predictive language processing.
The results of Study 3 established that when the cues in pre-target words match the predicted words, the pre-activation level of the expected words gets increased.