---
layout: post
title: (Ryskin & Nieuwland 2023) Prediction during language comprehension - what is next?
date: 2024-03-07 14:00
author: Ryskin, Rachel and Nieuwland, Mante S
tags: ['prediction in language comprehension', 'review', 'cognitive control']
journal: Trends in Cognitive Sciences
link: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2023.08.003

star: ['prediction', 'prediction and domain general']
year: 2023
---

- Review studies showing that listeners and readers use all manner of contextual information to generate multifaceted predictions about upcoming input. 
- The nature of these predictions may vary between individuals owing to differences in language experience, among other factors. 
- Three unsolved questions: 
    - Is prediction essential to language processing or an optional strategy?
    - Are predictions generated from within the language system or by domain-general processes?
    - What is the relationship between prediction and memory?
    - Does prediction in comprehension require simulation via the production system?

## Why predict?

Everyday conversations are very fast: despite the typical 2-3 words/s speech rate, interlocutors start responding within a quarter of a second after the other finishes, if not sooner. An increasingly popular hypothesis is that people are generally able to keep up with language input by predicting what comes next - by activating the meaning and potentially other aspects of words ahead of time. But the underlying cognitive architecture and mechanism is still unclear.

Deep learning and comp modeling suggest that predicting the next word (or other linguistic units) is what makes models successful in learning human-like language or replicating behavioural and neuroimaging results. Prediction has also been a highly productive explanatory framework across domains of cognitive science (e.g. predictive coding in vision). 

> Predictive coding
>
> 1. Hierarchical organization: sensory inputs are represented at the lowest levels, whereas more abstract information (e.g. word meanings) is represented at higher levels of the hierarchy.
> 2. Top-down predictions are transmitted from higher levels to lower levels of the hierarchy: each level predicts the responses in the level immediately below via feedback connections.
> 3. Bottom-up prediction errors travel from lower levels to higher levels of the hierarchy: each level transmits the discrepancy between the predicted response and the estimated actual response to the level immediately above it via feed forward connections.
> 4. Prediction errors are used to update the response at each level and generate the next prediction, thus allowing the mind to process/infer the current input and continuously adapt to its environment.
> 5. Predictions and errors are carried by distinct populations of functional units.
> 6. Bayesian inference and precision-weighting: the predictive coding algorithm approximates Bayesian inference. 

However, prediction at the computational level need not be implemented by a mechanism with an explicitly predictive objective. Models with different objective functions (e.g. incremental word recognition, homeostasis) can also account for some aspects of predictive behavior in humans ([citation](https://link.springer.com/article/10.3758/s13423-021-01924-x) and [citation](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2021.147578)). 

> Prediction in language by measuring human neural activity
>
> - ERPs/EEG/MEG

## Predictions at the computational level

- Computational analysis: humans predict upcoming linguistic input based on internal models of the environment, and update those models based on some comparison between the prediction and the received input. 
- It is unclear whether processing difficulty is a log-linear function of probability in context (as proposed in surprisal theory). 
- Models predicting neural activity (e.g. fMRI data) works better when using representations that incorporate context via a neural network relative to representations of linguistic input that do not (e.g. distributional semantic model)
- There was a prediction vs. integration debate on reading time and ERP data, but compelling evidence has shown that it's prediction.
- Multivariate approaches to analysing neural data have revealed the predictive processes occurring in the moments before the crucial input is received. ([citation](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39061) and [citation](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1733-19.2020))

### The input: the context for prediction

- The context is often operationalised as the preceding words in a sentence and their semantic and syntactic properties. 
- Comprehenders consider a broad scope of contextual information: large narrative, pragmatic cues, etc. 

### The output: the content of prediction

- Robust evidence for semantic prediction.
- Prediction appears to be graded and can include many aspects of form and meaning. 
- Role of hierarchical prediction across multiple representational domains and timescales, where higher-level information constrains predictions at lower levels ([citation](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01516-2), [citation](https://10.1073/pnas.2201968119), [citation](https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01467))
- Acoustic features of words appear to be more sharply encoded by the brain when those words are semantically related to their context ([citation](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0584-19.2019)). 
- Sensory sampling is increased when uncertainty is higher ([citation](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.10.019)). 

- It's unclear though whether top-down predictive signals reach sensory-perceptual (visual or auditory) representations. 
- Debate between Delong and Nieuwland

### Constraints and variability in prediction

- Bayesian brain vs. resource-rational accounts
- Resource-rational accounts propose that prediction should be rational inferences within the biological and informational constraints of the human brain. But it's unclear what the constraints are with respect to language. 

- Studies from children, second-language learners, and older adults.

- The internal model of the world where prediction is from cannot be innate and must be learned. A common view is that prediction is not an end in itself but is a means by which the internal model can continuously adapt to more accurately reflect the world. 
- Prediction updates in young children are larger when children have more vocabulary knowledge. And prediction becomes more accurate as children refine their model of the language.
- Similarly, L2 learners who have less experience also appear to predict less than natives who have more experience. Which may be explained by low accuracy of the internal model that generates prediction. And the differences go away when highly proficient. 
- Finally, the difference in neural or behavioural responses between predictable and unpredictable stimuli is reduced for older adults than younger. This might be explained by more efficient prediction as a result of optimised internal model and thus attenuated updating in the face of novel sensory input. (Older people rely more on models than actual input?)

- But alternative account is prediction is a result of language experience: both children and L2 learners. 
- Related to the last point, a proposal that general cognitive maturation (working memory skills) explains the delay in adult-like language prediction. 
- And L2 low vs. high proficiency results can also be explained in terms of how much executive resources an L2 speaker can spare for prediction. 
- And finally the older adult data might simply be due to decline in executive resources. 

## Toward a mechanism for prediction in language

__*Current proposals*:__

### Predictive coding

Linguistic predictions from higher levels are sent down to lower levels and a mismatch between prediction and input is sent back up the hierarchy. Attempts to explicitly connects the amplitudes of N400 to precision-weighted bottom-up predictive coding error signals. 

### Error-based learning

Traditional connectionist approaches to language have often incorporated a prediction error primarily as the driver of learning. The model attempts to predict the next element in a sequence and calculate prediction error upon input. This error is propagated back to update the model weights with the goal of minimizing future prediction error (Q: how is this different from predictive coding and minimising free energy??)

### Alternatives

Many alternative models may not incorporate explicit prediction (or prediction error) but can still account for empirical data: NNs that might not have the goal of prediction (e.g. when only goal is homeostasis) can produce prediction-like behaviours. (but again how is homestasis different from minimising free energy?)

__*Key unresolved issues*:__

### Is prediction essential or optional?

Many current frameworks in the cognitive science of language view prediction as 'part-and-parcel' of human language, but other accounts say that prediction is beneficial but not essential. 

Evidence for essential: prediction in naturalistic settings; neural signals of prediction generation before target; 'semantic readiness potential'; etc.

Evidence for optional: Huettig Guerra; reading time differences disappear higher proportion of unpredictable targets.

One important challenge is that a lack of effect is difficult to interpret. Three possibility: (1) comprehender predicted nothing; (2) Comprehender had a strong prediction of something else not presented; (3) comprehender had a weak prediction (probability distribution with high entropy). But multivariate approaches might help distinguishing between (2) and (3). 

The essential computation view benefits from parsimony. Continuously prediction and updating the internal model is ubiquitous and obligatory , metabolic cost of prediciton is subsumed within the cost of comprehension. 

Optional models must posit a mechanism by which the cost or utility of the prediction is tracked and evaluated. Executive function has often been proposed to fulfill that role. 

> Domain general processes in language
>
> The language network plausibly shares computational properties with other networks such as prediction, inference, learning from error. But it's unclear to what extent these compuations occur within local circuits or whether they are mediated by a hub.
>
> Independently, cognitive control seems to be involved in language processing. Cognitive control and related terms such as working memory, executive function, attention, refer to the ability to flexibly process information in a task-relevant way. This appears to recruit a network involving frontal, cingulate, and parietal brain areas, regardless of input modality. 
> 
> Although some correlational studies suggest cognitive control may play a role in language processing (better cognitive control individuals may perform better in language), in naturalistic language processing this frontoparietal network seems to be minimally engaged. 
>
> But although passive comprehension might need no cognitive control, many aspects of language is not passive: selecting relevant output in production, dealing with noisy input, etc. 

### Does linguistic prediction rely on language-specific or domain-general processes?

In one sense, prediction can be thought of as domain general because it is a canonical computation of human cortex that takes place in other functions than language e.g. vision and sensory. In another sense, it may be domain specific if it is implemental in local circuits rather than being directed by a shared prediction hub. These need not be fully mutually exclusive. 

Unpredictable linguistic input evoke largest responses in the language network (frontal and temporal regions selective to language). Thus the computation of linguistic prediction likely takes part within the local circuits of this language network. But whether additional networks are recruited for linguistic prediction is unclear. 

Another sense of domain general: the engagement of cognitive processes such as executive function and working memory. Whether linguistic prediction engages amodal executive function andor working memory is unclear. 

Children and L2 data have been used to argue for the role of EF and WM in prediction. But individual difference studies give mixed results. 

Alternatively, executive resources may come online to deal with the consequences of prediction rather than during generation of prediction. E.g. evidence for higher theta band activity in response to unexpected words. Theta band activity has been linked to both cognitive control and prediction error. But EEG cannot yet localise the theta band activity (language circuit or cognitive control circuit). 

Similarly, attention appears to be needed to engage fully in predictive processing because listeners who are simultaneously distracted by a visual monitoring task show smaller N400 effects (but this is taking attention away from the entire language input, which should be different from distributing attention between bottom-up and top-down input as what I did in my exp). Decrease in alpha/beta band activities before the target word in constraining context: alpha/beta activity has been linked to increased attention across a variety of domains, **suggesting attention could be particularly important for the generation of predictions or that constraining sentences are more attention-grabbing**.

By contrast, during naturalistic story listening, the relationship between neural activity and word-by-word surprisal is robust within the language system, but not within the multiple-demand system. And behavioural measures of comprehension difficulty elicit robust bold responses within the language system but not the multiple-demand system. Thus the frontoparietal executive resources are not recruited during typical language comprehension at least not detectable by fmri. 

But executive resources can still be recruited when there is prediction error. 

### What is the relationship between prediction and memory?

The content of prediction is shaped by memory. According to error-based learning, every prediction instance is followed by a comparison between the prediction and the received input, and the difference between the two leads to updated internal model. This means that each instance of prediction also constitutes a learning eveng. Late freontal positivities are hypothesized to signature this update of internal model. This component has been linked to inhibitory control processes, and is potentially consistent with a role for cognitive control in prediction error signaling. 

Words that are highly predictable elicit less repetition effects when presented again later, which is consistent with prediction-error-based learning mechanisms. Words that are predicted but never presented also elicit pseudo-repetition effects when later presented, suggesting lingering effects of generating the predictions. 

### What is the role of the production system in prediction during comprehension?

Early prediction-by-production accounts. This proposal is consistent with how prediciton and production are implementN400 effects are reduced by articulatory supression tasks. Reading out loud facilitate prediction compared to silently. 

However a recent version of the prediction-by-production perspective proposes that prediction takes place via the production system only under particular conditions when the costs of production are low. Parallels between the role of production and the question of whether prediction is essential. 

What is the relationship between language comprehension and language production? Neuropsychological work suggest the division between produciton and comprehension occurs relatively upstream (e.g. aphasia affecting production more than comprehension). But the two systems must share some representations because both need linguistic knowledge. 

## Conclusions

- Humans concurrently predict. 
- They use all cues (emm but phonology is never mentioned here as a predictive cue well)
- development of a mechanistic account of linguistic prediction:
    - determining whether prediction is essential and constitutive for language processing, as opposed to an optional strategy.
    - delineating the role of non-linguistic mechanisms in linguistic prediction
    - explaining the bidirectional effects of memory on prediction, and of prediction on memory
    - identifying the extent of interconnectedness between language production and language comprehension. 