---
title: (Feldman and Friston) Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy
author: Feldman, Harriet and Friston, Karl J
journal: Frontiers Research Foundation
year: 2010
tags: ['predictive coding', 'attention', 'free energy']
link: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215
star: ['predictive coding', 'theory']
date: 2024-06-01 00:00
---

- Both predictions about the state of the world generating sensory data and the precision of those data have to be optimised. 
- If the precision depends on the states, one can explain many aspects of attention. 

## Introduction

More recent and formal accounts appeal to information theory and computational principles with an increasing emphasis on Bayesian formulations. Probability distributions are central to modern treatments of perception that cast *perception as inference*. A broad distribution encodes a high degree of uncertainty about a particular cause. This uncertainty is mathematically the average surprise over all possibilities. A key measure of uncertainty is the variance of the distribution, or inverse precision. 

Attention is concerned with optimizing the uncertainty or precision of probabilistic representations, rather than what is being represented. Precision is encoded by the synaptic gain (post-synaptic responsiveness) of units reporting prediction errors. 

Most generative models so far ignore state-dependent noise or error variance, assuming that it is constant for any sensory data channel. We relax this assumption and consider generative models in which the states of the world (for example the presence of attentional cues) can change the precision of sensory data. 

Post-synaptic responsiveness of sensory (prediction error) units is modulated by attentional mechanisms. Two neurobiological candidates for modulating synaptic gain linked to attention: synchronous gain meidated by fast oscillatory or synchronized activity; and classical neuromodulatory (cholinergic) neurotransmission. 

Desyncronization with increased gamma activity is seen during attentional tasks. Increased gamma is associated with faster reaction times. Gamma oscillations are profoundly affected by acetylcholine; which appears to increase synaptic gain directly by reducing spike-frequency adaptation or facilitate the induction of gamma by reducing adaptation in pyramidal cells, decreasing activity of inhibitory interneurons, or directly inactivating specific interneurons. 

Attention is the process of optimizing synaptic gain to represent the precision of sensory information (prediction error) during hierarchical inference. 

## Attention, biased competition and the Posner paradigm

Early cognitive models of attention:

- Difference between early and late selection. 
- Broadbent 1958: attention by selecting stimuli at an early stage of processing, when only basic physical attributes had been encoded. Only the selected stimuli enter the identification system, which can only handle one stimulus at a time. 
- Deutsch and Deutsch 1963: all stimuli are processed semantically before selection for consciousness recall. 
- Lavie 1995: perceptual load plays an important role in attentional selection: early selection occures with higher attentional load, late selection with lower load. 

### Biased competition:

- Limited capacity or resource in vision: small lower level receptive fields compete to drive larger RFs at higher hierarchical levels. 
- attention is an emergent property of competition between stimuli for attentional recourses, which is influenced by the properties of the stimuli and task requirements. 
- if two stimuli are presented within a cell's receptive field, the response to both will be smaller than the sum of the response to the stimuli presented separately. 
- bottom-up biases result from properties of stimulus itself
- top-down biases reflect the cognitive requirements of the task rather than the stimuli. Both additive (baseline shift) and multiplicative (attentional gain) components that may depend on each other.

### The Posner papradigm

Subjects are required to foveate a central spot and respond as quickly as possible to the appearance of a peripheral target. The target is cued with either a central arrow indicating the side it will appear on, or peripheral box around the target's eventual location. The cue is valid most of the time. 

Reaction times to validly cued targets were significantly shorter than to invalidly cued targets. (attention shift with no gaze shift)

Basic phenomena disclosed in the Posner paradigm may not depend on high-level cognitive processing. 