---
title: (Jackson & Bolger 2014) The neurophysiological bases of EEG and EEG measurement - A review for the rest of us
author: Jackson, Alice F and Bolger, Donald J
journal: Psychophysiology
year: 2014
tags: ['EEG', 'ERP', 'ERPs', 'methods', 'signal propagation']
star: ['methods']
link: https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.12283
date: 2024-11-12 00:00
---

# The neural source of EEG

- EEG arises from synchronized synaptic activity in populations of cortical neurons.
- *Dipole*: a region of positive charge separated from a region of negative charge by some distance.
    - *source*: region of positive charge
    - *sink*: region of negative charge
- An electrode can only detect dipoles when the electrode is closer to either the positive or negative end of the dipole. 
- EEG can measure both tangential dipoles (vertical to scalp), and radial dipoles (parallel with scalp).
- Dipoles have positive and negative sides, so will produce both a positive deflection and a negative deflection at different regions of the scalp. 

- The sum of many individual dipoles in an area is measurable as a single dipole whose magnitude reflects the number of neurons whose dipoles are summing together. 
- Neurons must be both arranged in a parallel fashion and synchronously active. 

- EEG cannot determine if activity is excitatory or inhibitory.
    - excitatory postsynaptic potential at soma = inhibitory postsynaptic potential at the apical dendrites.

- A combination of thalamocortical and corticocortical connections are thought to drive the synchronous activity that gives rise to EEG

# How EEG travels from the brain to the recording device

### Within the brain

- Volume conduction is responsible for the propagation of the EEG signal within the brain. 
    - ions appeal each other, resulting in a wave of charge that travels through the extracellular space.

### From the brain to electrode

- The signal must travel from the brain, through the dura layers, the skull layers, the scalp, and to the electrode. 
- Between volumes, ions cannot pass through, so capacitance is responsible for the signal's propagation.
- Charged ions accumulate at one side (result of conduction) and attract differently charged ion at the other side. 

# Measureing issues

### Signal summation and smearing

- A measurement is a single voltage typically taken 500-1000Hz.
- A measurement of voltage at any position on the scalp will consist of the sum of influences from many sources of electric fields because the brain is full of dipoles.
- *Spatial smearing*: each dipole exerts influence in nearly all directions, so a dipole will influence the charge in a range of scalp locations, not just on the scalp immediately above the dipole. 

- EEG cycles between positive and negative, as a result of cycles in neural activity. 
- Typical frequency between 0.1-30Hz. 
- Higher frequencies (gamma, 30-80Hz) are more difficult to study because heavily attenuated by the skill and scalp layers, and may be overshadowed by muscular and ocular artifacts. 

### Can EEG detect dipoles anywhere in cortex?

- EEG can measure any dipole whose source and sink are not equidistant to the electrode, so sensitive to both tangential and radial dipoles (unlike MEG).
    - EEG signals can come from both gyri and sulci. 

- Limitation of EEG signal is the size of the electric field produced by a set of neurons. 
- A large dipole deep in the brain may still be measurable at the electrode, although it may contribute a smaller signal than the surface sources will. 

### Which electrical sources in the brain will be measrued at the scalp

### Why is electrode gel necessary

- The skill, dead skin cells, hair and air in the interstices of hair are poor conductors. 
- Ideally, the highly conductive electrode gel will saturate the space beneath an electrode, filling in the air pockets between hairs and thus providing a conductive path from scalp to electrode. 

### Signal to noise

- Depending on the research question at hand, elements of the EEG itself may be considered noise.
    - Some ERP components such as the N1 and P1 are proposed to emerge or at least are determined by the superposition of underlying oscillations at several frequency bands. 

#### External noise

- The electrical power supply in buildings is often the loudest source of noise.
- Passive shielding and active electrodes (amplifiers).

#### Internal noise

- Predictable (breathing, heartbeat)
- Unpredictable (muscle tension, blinking)

### Why is the amplifier necessary, and what does it do

- Maximise SNR, and increase the size of a signal above the size of noise that may be introduced in later elements of the circuit. 

- Input impedance of the amplifier determines how well the amplifier can tolerate a poor connection to the scalp. 

### Why is the amplifier input impedance important

- Impedance: Resistance in AC circuits, rather than DC circuits. 
- Currents measured from the brain are alternating, so EEG is discussed in impedance.

- The amplifier measures the voltage in a circuit (the EEG signal) by inserting a very large resister (the input impedance) into the circuit. 
    - The input impedance is so much larger than every other source of resistance in the circuit that it represents almost all of the resistance, and so almost all of the voltage drops (=voltage) across it. 
- The EEG signal is very small, so it's important to measure as much of the signal as possible
- the impact of electrical noise is minimized

- EEG needs a high input impedance, because:
    - Noise typically enter the circuit later than the signal, so receives less resistance from the wire.
    - If the input impedance is small, then it will make up a smaller proportion of resistance for the signal (because more resistance from wire) than noise. Thus the voltage measured across the impedance will have more noise than signal.
    - When the input impedance is enormous, this problem is avoided: instead of measuring a voltage that is composed of a small amount of the signal and a large amount of the noise, it measures nearly the entire signal and nearly all of the noise. 

### Connection between the electrode and the scalp

- Small resistance between scalp and electrode is preferred, allowing more signal to pass. 
- High input impedance allows tolerance of higher scalp-electrode resistance. 

# Concluding principles

- Care in collection:
    - letting electrodes settle (allowing creation of half-cell potential)
- Care in localization:
    - the inverse problem
    - be aware of assumptions made by the localisation methods
    - use localisation in conjunction with neuroimaging
- Care in interpretation:
    - EEG alone cannot determine excitatory/inhibitory activity
    - EEG alone cannot determine effort or efficiency:
        - can support conclusion of efficiency obtained from other methods (fMRI, fNIRS)
        - interpret the direction of a deflection relative to a control condition