---
layout: post
title: (Botvinick et al. 2001) Conflict Monitoring and Cognitive Control
date: 2024-03-07 14:00
author: Botvinick, Matthew M and Braver, Todd S and Barch, Deanna M and Carter, Cameron S and Cohen, Jonathan D
tags: ['cognitive control', 'conflict monitoring', 'modeling']
journal: Psychological Review
link: https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0033-295X.108.3.624

star: ['cognitive control']
---

## Intro

- Cognitive control: the cognitive system's ability to configure itself for the performance of specific tasks through appropriate adjustments in perceptual selection, response biasing, and the online maintenance of contextual information. 
- Little is known about how the intervention of control processes is itself brought about. (how do we know when control is needed)

Questions:
- on what basis is control recruited?
- once the relevant control processes are engaged in guiding task performance, how is their influence modulated or optimized?
- what processes govern how and when control is withdrawn? (with practice on some initially difficult tasks, performance becomes increasingly automatic. As this happens the need for control diminishes.)

## The conflict monitoring hypothesis

- we argue that there exists a system that monitors for the occurrence of conflicts in information processing (conflict monitoring). 
- conflict monitoring serves to translate the occurrence of conflict into compensatory adjustments in control: the conflict monitoring system first evaluates current levels of conflict, then passes this information on to centers responsible for control, triggering them to adjust the strength of their influence on processing. 
- the detection of conflict may be among the functions of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC).

## Theoretical background

### Control as conflict prevention

- Crosstalk interference between concurrent processes: if the processing neural pathways for two stimuli are nonoverlapping, then processing can take place in parallel. But if the pathways cross, the stimuli will interact or interfere with one another. 
- Dual-task performance: dramatic decrements in performance occur in both typing to dictation and reading aloud when a difficulty of this combination can be understood as deriving from crosstalk between the processing pathways activated by auditory and visual inputs, leading to conflicting responses at the level of both speech and typing. 

- The recognition of crosstalk as a ubiquitous pitfall of parallel processing has led to a particular view of cognitive control, according to which one of its central functions is to prevent conflicts. 
- In visual search, top-down control of visual attention has been portrayed as helping to prevent the interference that can occur when multiple objects are processed in parallel. 
- Attention as serving to regulate the flow of information through the processing system, favoring flow into selected processing streams while helping to gate off others.

### Using conflict as a basis for modulating control

