---
title: (Lee et al. 2012) Neural basis of reinforcement learning and decision making
author: Lee, Daeyeol and Seo, Hyojung and Jung, Min Whan
journal: Annual review of neuroscience
year: 2012
tags: ['decision-making']
link: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-062111-150512
date: 2024-09-23 00:00
---

## Reinforcement learning theory of decision making

- Economic theories of decision making: choices can be understood as the selection of action that has the maximum value (utilities) among all possible actions. vs.
- Reinforcement theories: the goal of reinforcement is to maximize future rewards. An animal's experience alters its value functions, which in turn influence subsequent choices. 

Value functions reflect the animals empirical estimates for its future rewards. 
- Action value function: the sum of future rewards for taking a particular action in a particular state of environment (Q(s,a))
- State value function: (V(s)) the sum of future rewards expected from a particular state of the animal's environment. 
- V(s) = Mean(Q(s,a1)\*P(a1) + Q(s,a2)\*P(a2) + ...)

## Model-free vs model-based reinforcement learning

Value functions can be updated according to two different types of information: 
- the reward or penalty received by the animal after each action (reward prediction error); or 
- model-based updating on the basis of the animal's knowledge of the environment without direct reward or penalty. 

## Learning during social decision making

- During social interaction, the outcomes of actions are often jointly determined by the actions of multiple players. 
- decision makers can improve the outcomes by applying model-free reinforcement learning. 
- but also through model-based learning according to the predicted behaviors of the other players. 
- hybrid models are better at prediction human decision making data