---
layout: post
title: (Federmeier, K. D., & Kutas, M., 1999). A rose by any other name - Long-term memory structure and sentence processing
date: 2024-01-21 19:00
author: Federmeier, Kara D and Kutas, Marta
tags: ['English', 'semantic processing', 'prediction', 'prediction in language comprehension', 'memory retrieval', 'EEG', 'ERP', 'N400']
journal: Journal of Memory and Language
link: https://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1999.2660
year: 1999
---

Comprehenders are remarkably good at using sentential contexts to constrain guesses (sentence continuations) in offline tasks (cloze task). Previous research has also shown that context can affect word processing in a few measurable ways (reading time on target word, lexical decision RT, word-naming RT). ERP shows that predictable words elicit smaller N400 than unpredictable words (KH1980). Further N400 evidence also suggest that the effect of context on N400 amplitude maybe (1) graded (most predictable < less predictable) and (2) depends the strength of context. Moreover, studies have suggested that the N400 may index long-term memory processes, therefore one possibility is that the context effects seen in language processing also reflects the structure of semantic long-term memory (categories and network). Therefore this study investigates whether contextual effects on the N400 reflect long-term memory.

RQ: Does context effect on N400 amplitude reflect the structure of semantic long-term memory (categories/feature overlaps)?

### Conditions
#### Violation types

- Within-category violations (close in long-term memory), "They wanted to make the hotel look more like a tropical resort. So along the driveway, they planted rows of pines."
- Between-category violations (far in long-term memory), "…tulips." Expected, "…palms."
- Additional factor: High constraint (0.9 cloze) vs. low constraint (0.6 cloze)

DV: ERP responses/N400 amplitude

### Predictions
- Expected target should elicit the smallest N400 ('a positivity')
- Between-category violations should elicit larger N400
- Within-category violations should elicit :
    - similar N400 to expected if N400 is only sensitive to feature overlap (semantic long-term memory), 
    - similar N400 to between-category violations if the N400 is only sensitive to context, and 
    - intermediate N400 if the N400 is sensitive to both feature overlaps and the context. 

## Results

Both within and between-category violations elicited N400 with right medial posterior-central scalp distribution. Amplitude of within-category was larger than between-category. Amplitude of within-category violations was larger in low vs. high constraint sentences. 

## Interpretation
Comprehension system is sensitive to both contextual information and categorical relationship. And the effect of context and categories overlap greatly in time and should be of the same kind. A plausible hypothesis that could explain the results is that during comprehension readers generate predictions / pre-activate semantic features of upcoming words, and when this prediction is disconfirmed we can see an N400.