---
title: (Hubbard & Federmeier) Dividing attention influences contextual facilitation and revision during language comprehension
author: Hubbard, Ryan J and Federmeier, Kara D
journal: Brain Research
year: 2021
tags: ['language', 'attention', 'prediction', 'EEG', 'ERPs', 'N400', 'frontal positivity']
link: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2021.147466
star: ['prediction and domain general']
date: 2024-05-28 00:00
---

- dual-task: language comprehension + tracking dot motions in the background
- N400 effects in full attention conditions, reduced N400 effects in divided attention conditions
- Frontal positivity unaffected by attention
- In addition, divided attention elicited posterior positivity
- Prediction may still happen in divided attention, but additional resources may be required to process unexpected information

(Is the above consistent with the idea that prediction is more important in divided attention (Friston)? If we lose the ability to deal with unexpected input in divided attention...)

## Intro

- Language comprehension is usually effortless, and models of word recognition and lexical access have proposed that those are automatic and do not require attention. 
- However prediction is thought to require metabolic and cognitive resources and is not always engaged. 

### Effect of attention on word processing

- Visual word recognition and spatial attention: spatial cuing: word recognition can be done outside the focus of attention, but with increased lexical decision times and reduced priming effects. 
- Reduced attention resources: dual-task: frequency effects preserve with divided attention, but lexical decision and naming latencies increase. 
- Reduced N400 effects when attention is divided (priming exps). 

### Effect of attention on sentence processing

- Sentence masking paradigm: reduced or abolished N400 effect congruent vs incongruent target

- Frontal positivity as an index of prediction is engaged?
- Parafoveal unexpected words don't elicit positivities. One explanation is attention is needed to revision-related processes. 

- Correlation between attention and language comprehension as indicated by SLI and ADHD. 

### This study

- N400 + frontal positivity
- Dual-task: language comprehension + random dot kinetogram (RDK)
- Expected vs. unexpected x full vs. divided attention x strong vs. weak constraining
- Oddball P3 task to verify attention division?

## Results

- Reduced N400 effects between exp vs. unexp in divided attention.
- No evidence for influence of attention on late positivity effects

## Discussion

- When attention was divides, contextual facilitation effect was reduced: N400 amplitudes to expected endings were more negative than full attention. 
- However, the effect of attention was equal for high vs. low constraining contexts. Suggests that prediction (as opposed to integration) was not eradicated by divided attention (?). 
- No impact of divided attention on the size of frontal positivity; no indication that predictive processing was diminished by dividing attention, or that revision or updating processes recruited to deal with prediction violations were affected by attention. 
- An additional posterior positivity for high constraint unexpected (which usually is elicited by high constraint anomalous). when attentional resources are limited, the brain may require more effort for reanalysis and integration of the unexpected information, leading to engagement of both mechanisms. 

- The current results suggest that dividing sustained attention impairs integrative mechanisms during language comprehension, but predictive processing may be spared and continue to be engaged. 
- The brain appears to allocate attentional resources towards predictive processing in order to reduce demands on sensory processing. Given that language input generally arrives rapidly and continuously, it may be beneficial for the brain to prioritize speed of processing over depth of encoding and accuracy; and one way to do that is through prediction (pre-activation). 