---
layout: post
title: (Friston, K., 2009).  The free-energy principle - a rough guide to the brain?
date: 2024-01-15 10:00
author: Friston, Karl
tags: ['prediction', 'predictive coding', 'free energy', 'theory']
journal: Trends in Cognitive Sciences
link: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005

star: ['predictive coding', 'theory']
year: 2009
---

## Intro
Free energy principle: any adaptive change in the brain will minimize free energy. 

## Free energy and self organization

- Free energy is an information theory quantity that bounds the evidence for a model of data
- Data are sensory inputs and the model is encoded by the brain.
- Free energy is greater than the negative log-evidence or surprise in sensory data. 
- Unlike surprise itself, free energy can be evaluated because it is a function of sensory data and brain states. Under simplifying assumptions, it is just the amount of prediction error. 

### The Bayesian brain

- Mathematically, the difference between free-energy and surprise is the divergence between a probabilistic representation (recognition density) encoded by the agent and the true conditional distribution of the causes of sensory input. 
- This representation enables the brain to reduce free energy by changing its representation which makes the recognition density an approximate conditional density. 
- The free energy principle subsumes the Bayesian brain hypothesis or the notion that the brain is an inference or helmholtz machine. 

### Beyond Bayes to active inference

- To reduce surprise we have to change sensory input.
- According to the free energy principle, our actions should also minimize free energy (IFM??? That forward model is also responsible for action??)
- Action can reduce free energy ie prediction errors by changing sensory input, whereas perception reduces free energy by changing predictions. 
- In this view, perception is enslaved by action to provide veridical predictions that guides active sampling of the sensorium.
    1. agents resist a natural tendency to disorder by minimsing a free energy bound on surprise
    2. this entails acting on the environment to avoid surprises
    3. which rests on making Bayesian inferences about the world

### Neuronal implementation

- the brain has to encode a recognition density with its physical attributes. These have the role of sufficient statistics (numbers that specify a distribution like means and sd)
- precision (reverse variances) that generate uncertainty about states could be encoded in post-synaptic sensitivity or gain.
- according to the free-energy principle: perceptual inference - optimisation of synaptic activity to encode the states of the environment; perceptual learning and memory - optimisation of synaptic connections that encode contingencies and causal regularities; attention - neuromodulatory optimisation of synaptic gain that encodes the precision of states.
- optimising the sufficient statistics of the parameters is formally identical to associative plasticity and optimising the sufficient statistics of precision is similar to the assimilation of prediction error in reinforcement learning schemes. 
- hierarchical dynamic models of the world formally equivalent to empirical Bayesian models in which higher levels provide empirical priors or constraints on lower levels.

> #### Recognition dynamics
>
> - state-unites that encode the expected or predicted state and error-units that encode precision-weighted prediction error.
> - forward connections conveying prediction error to state-unites and reciprocal backward connections that mediate predictions. 
> - We can identify error-units with superficial pyramidal cells because the only messages that are passed up the hierarchy are prediction errors and superficial pyramidal cells originate forward connections in the brain. This is useful because these cells are the primary source of EEG.
> - Similarly the source of backward connections are deep pyramidal cells and we can deduce that these encode the expected causes of sensory states.

## New perspectives

### The neural code, gain and precision

- the brain represents probability distributions over sensory causes. 
- Free form vs. fixed-form of this distribution.
- Free form:
    - particle filtering () and probabilistic population codes (neuronal activity encodes the amplitude of fixed basis functions).
    - does not scale. 
- Fixed form:
    - usually multinomial (the world is one of several discrete states (hidden Markov models)) or Gaussian (continuous or correlated states). 

- We choose Laplace approximation because it can handle continuous and correlated states, efficient because recognition density is specified only by its mean and conditional precision can be derived from the mean and does not need to be encoded explicitly.

### Attention and precision

- necessity to optimise relative precision of empirical (top-down) priors and (bottom-up) sensory evidence = modulating the gain of error-units = synaptic gain control of the sort invoked for attention. 
- "Attention is he process of optimising precision during hierarchical inference"
- Attention might not be the selection of sensory channels but an emergent property of prediction: high-precision prediction-errors enjoy greater gain.

### Value-learning, motivational salience and precision

- literature on decision-making focus on loss, reward, utility that guides behaviour to maximise value or expected reward, and dopaminergic system.
- Free-energy says that loss is surprise and expected loss is expected surprise or entropy. Quantities optimised by action under value-learning are exactly the same as those optimised by active sampling under the free-energy principle. Thus the notion of value is redundant and reinforcement/procedual learning can be recast in terms of active inference.
- basic idea is to replace value-functions with prior expectations about sensory trajectories. Action then ensures prior expectations are met and desired states are frequented. 
- reappraisal of the role of dopamine: dopamine might not encode the prediction error on value but the value of prediction error, where value is precision or incentive salience. 
- the role of dopamine in optimising precision in anterior systems (mesocortical and mesolimbic) trying to predict proprioceptive and interoceptive sensations; the role of acetylcholine in optimising hierarchical inference on extroceptive input in posterior (paralimbic and parietal) systems (i.e. attention)

## Conclusion

- free energy principle might provide a comprehensive account of how we represent the world and come to sample it adaptively. 
- mathmatical specification of what the brain is doing: suppressing free-energy. 