---
layout: post
title: (Keatley & de Gelder, 1992) The bilingual primed lexical decision task - Cross-language priming disappears with speeded responses
date: 2024-03-21 15:00
author: Keatley, Catharine and Gelder, Beatrice de
tags: ['decision making', 'lexical decision', 'speeded decision task']
journal: European Journal of Cognitive Psychology
link: https://doi.org/10.1080/09541449208406188

star: ['speeded decision task']
---

- In exps 2 and 3, the subjects were asked to respond at a specific fast rate.
- Results show significant priming within languages, but priming in the cross-language conditions disappeared. 

## Intro

- shared conceptual store vs. distinct and independent symbol systems of bilingual memory.
- Shared (hierarchical) model of bilingual memory:
    - words have two levels of representation, lexical and semantic. 
    - Lexical representations are stored separately while the semantic representations are shared and in an abstract form. 
- Separate store model (dual-coding model):
    - semantic/lexical representations of the words in different languages are stored in separate independent but interconnected memory stores.
    - Transfer across representations occures more easily within languages than across languages.

Primed lexical decision task:
- What sort of processing is responsible for the cross-language priming effect?
- Does cross-language priming reflect patterns of automatic activation which are determined by the basic organisation of representations in memory (shared memory store)?
- Does it reflect pre-lexical strategies employed by subjects to respond quickly?
- Does it reflect post-lexical meaning-integration processes which occur after access of target?

## Exp 1

- French-Dutch bilinguals
- prime - target 200ms SOA
- high vs. low proportion of related prime-target pairs between subjects
- *After lexical decision, the reaction time was displayed at the bottom of the screen for 1500ms.*

- no interactions between relatedness and either target language or language mix. 
- different from previous bilingual and monolingual lexical decision experiments.
- *Trial-by-trial visual feedback of their response times may have diverted their attention from noticing the overall relatedness between primes and targets in either proportion condition.*

## Exp 2

- ***Subjects were asked to respond with a RT between 500 and 600ms, but as close to 500ms as possible.***

- Responses were overall faster than Exp 1. 
- In Exp 1 low proportion, priming was significant in the cross-language conditions French-Dutch and Dutch-French, but in Exp 2, the between-langauge priming was not significant in either direction. 
- *When asked to respond at a particular fast rate, the cross-language priming disappeared.*

## Exp 3

- Same as Exp 2 but with Dutch native rather than French native speakers.
- Same results as Exp 2, when subjects are asked to respond at a specific fast rate on the lexical dicision task, priming occurs in within-language conditions but not in cross-language conditions. 

## Exp 4

- prime-target that are translation equivalents.
- Translation equivalents produced priming effects cross-language. 

## General discussion

- Support the general hypothesis that the representations of the meanings of words expressed in different languages are separate and discrete. Consistent with the general separate-store hypothesis. 
- However priming still occurred in translation equivalents meaning that results are not consistent with a model where the representations of words are neatly divided into linguistically determined modules. 

- Applying the general model of automaticity and skill: *When asked to respond especially quickly and given a means to monitor speed, they find that the meaning-integration process, which occurs after lexical access of the target, slows their response rate. The subjects respond to this by employing controlled attentional processing, which requires effort and attention, to interrupt the normal reading sequence ad restructure it so that meaning integration does not occur before the lexical decision.* Thus cross-language priming disappears and within-language priming may be reduced. 