---
title: (Ito & Hirose 2024) Sandhi-based predictability of pitch accent facilitates word recognition in Kansai Japanese speakers
author: Ito, Aine and Hirose, Yuki
journal: Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology
year: 2024
tags: ['language', 'prediction', 'word recognition', 'sandhi', 'pitch accent', 'Kansai Japanese']
link: https://doi.org/10.1177/17470218241237219
star: ['prediction and tone sandhi']
date: 2024-06-11 00:00
---

- Predictability effects of pitch accent on word recognition using Kansai JP sandhi. 
- Images of four objects while hearing modifier + noun phrases and select the corresponding image asap. 
- Faster RT in predictable conditions than unpredictable conditions in KJ speakers only when the modifier had an all-low tone sequence (sandhi tone).
- Same effect but weaker in Tokyo (TJ) speakers, which is not due to familiarity with KJ.
- The KJ facilitatory effect may be due to language universal constraint against sequential low tones (same as T3 sandhi?).

## Intro

### Pitch accent predictability in KJ and TJ

- L vs. H pitch.
- Lexically determined pitch accent in nouns. 
- TJ: accented noun: HL drop.
- KJ: word-initial pitch height contrast: 
    - A word either starts with H or L. 
    - In H-initial words, the tone either falls after the accented position or remains high if no accented mora.
    - In L-initial words, the tone rises at an accented mora, or at the final mora if no accented mora. 

### Current study

| Predictability | Initial tone of modifier | initial tone of noun | KJ pronunciation | meaning |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Predictable | Low | Low | si.ma.si.ma竏誰O hi.KO.o.ki | striped aeroplane |
| Predictable | Low | High | si.ma.si.ma竏地o HI.TU.JI | striped sheep |
| Unpredictable | High | Low | MI.ZU.TA.MA竏誰O hi.KO.o.ki | polka-dot aeroplane |
| Unpredictable | High | High | MI.ZU.TA.MA竏誰O HI.TU.JI | polka-dot sheep |

- The tone of NO can either be informative of the upcoming noun's tone or not.

- KJ speakers expected to show faster RT in the predictable conditions than the unpredictables. 
    - citation vs. sandhi: high NO (citation form) may show weaker effect than the low no. 
- TJ speakers expected to show no difference.

## Exp 1

- visual display of four objects (striped vs. dot x plane vs. sheep).
- listened to modifier-noun phrases and select picture asap using keyboard.
- Slow speech rate (unspecified), duration of NOs 664ms. **Silent interval of 800ms between NO and noun**. 

- KJ speakers: significantly shorter RT in Predictable-High condition, compared to other conditions.
- TJ speakers: overall slower RTs than KJ, but the same effect (smaller size).

## Exp 2

- same as 1 but TJ speakers complete questionnaire about exposure to KJ. 
- RT replicated exp 1. 
- KJ experience: questionnaire suggest unfamiliar with KJ; KJ experience measurements do not significantly predict RT. 