---
title: (Giraud and Peoppel 2012) Cortical oscillations and speech processing - emerging computational principles and operations
author: Giraud, Anne-Lise and Poeppel, David
journal: Nature neuroscience
year: 2012
tags: ['neural oscillations', 'speech processing', 'language', 'delta oscillations', 'theta oscillations', 'gamma oscillations']
link: https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3063
star: ['neural oscillations']
date: 2024-04-05 00:00
---

- delta, theta and gamma oscillations are specifically engaged by the multi-timescale, quasi-rhythmic properties of speech and can track its dynamics.
- they may be fundamental in speech and language processing, packaging incoming information into units of the appropriate temporal granularity. 

- Organizational principles and perceptual units of analysis at very different time scales:
    - phonemic scale: 30-50 Hz, short-duration and high modulation frequency: formant transitions, the coding of voicing, etc.
    - syllabic scale: 4-7 Hz, closely correlates with the acoustic envelope of naturalistic speech.
    - lexical/phrasal scale: 1-2 Hz, perceptual groupings that carry e.g. the intonation contour of an utterance.
    - these are rhythmic to elicit robust regularities in the time domain.

- Hypothesis: a critical ingredient for parsing and decoding connected speech lies in the infrastructure provided by neuronal oscillations, well suited to deal with time-domain phenomena. 
    - low gamma (25-35 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz) and delta (1-3 Hz) bands correspond to the (sub)phonemic, syllabic and phrasal processing.

## The central conjecture: oscillations determine speech analysis

- a cascade of processes that transform continuous speech into a discrete code, invariant to speech rate. 
- hypothesis: intrinsic oscillations in auditory cortes (A1 A2 / BA 41 42) interact with the neuronal (spiking) activity generated by an incoming speech signal. 