---
title: (Bannon et al. 2024) Is predicting during language processing worth it? Effects of cloze probability and semantic similarity on failed predictions.
author: Bannon, Julie and Gollan, Tamar H and Ferreira, Victor S
journal: Journal of Experimental Psychology - Learning, Memory, and Cognition
year: 2024
tags: ['prediction', 'prediction error']
star: ['cloze task']
link: https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/xlm0001347
date: 2025-01-21 00:00
---

- Prediction is accepted as a beneficial mechanism facilitating processing
- So the notion that predicting is better than not predicting
- but we don't know whether predicting incorrectly or partially incorrectly is better than not predicting

- this study compares failed predictions in highly constraining contexts to the same words presented in low constraint contexts

- The idea that failed predictions may be beneficial for language processing (learning) suggests that, even in the absence of opportunity to generate accurate predictions, predictive processing may still be a useful mechanism.

- Across three experiments, we manipulate cloze probability, semantic relatedness, and language modality (language production vs. language comprehension) to determine if failed predictions are more costly when the target is related or unrelated to a predicted term, compared to when no prediction is generated in an LC sentence.

- In general, if target stimuli are named or classified more quickly in the LC sentences, this would suggest there is a cost to prediction failure, such that processing would be faster if individuals had not made predictions at all. Alternatively, if naming onset latencies or classification times are similar in both the HC and LC conditions, this would indicate that prediction failure does not result in additional processing costs beyond that of lexical access without prediction.

# Exp 1

| word pair | condition | sentence |
| --- | --- | --- |
| brain/skull | HC | the frontal lobe is an important part of the brain. |
| brain/skull | HC | the pirate's flag displayed cross boses and a skull. |
| brain/skull | LC | After the class field trip, the girl told her mom all about the brain/skull. |

- HC small prediction error condition: The frontal lobe is an important part of the *skull*.
- HC large prediction error condition: in the story, snow white ate a poisoned *brain*.
- LC no prediction condition: Shirley was nervous that her guests wouldn't like her *cake*. 

- RSVP presentation word-by-word 500ms until the last word
- last word is replaced by a picture that participants need to name
- press space to begin recording

Q: what is the RT? from presentation to button press? what about from button press to speech onset?

- Results: reaction times LC/no prediction = HC-small error < HC-large error

- cost of prediction error: totally disconfirmed predictions slow down processing. (but see pic looks like effect is so small)

# Exp 2

- same as exp 1, but included expected fillers
- Results: same as Exp 1

# Exp 3 

- comprehension task: last word presented written and participants asked to name it
- Results: reaction times LC/no prediction < HC-small error < HC-large error


# General dis

Our results confirm that when one encounters a term that is a greater semantic distance from a predicted term, lexical access is slower relative to when a target is more closely related to the predicted term. Thus, the present data support a framework in which words are preactivated based on their likelihood of being encountered.
